# Learning Starts With Being Wrong

It happened again. Somebody was wrong on the internet. And when I politely pointed out that they were wrong, I was wrong too, only in ways I could never have anticipated. I was wrong about wrong.
I was wrong about wrong. I bet you're wrong about wrong too.
First, wrong is such a simple word to be overloaded so much.
If I postulate x+y=7, then later say that x and y are 5 and 8, those two statements cannot both be true at the same time. Obviously I am wrong. A more precise way of stating things is that I am inconsistent. I think most of the time when we say somebody is wrong, we mean they are being inconsistent with either things they've said previously or things that all people hold to be true.
This is probably the worst way about being wrong about wrong: thinking of human language as if it were geometry. "You said A implies B, and B implies C, so of course A must imply C, right?"
Wrong.  You are confusing two completely different types of communication.
Perhaps "B" in the first context means one thing. The same term "B" might mean a subtly different thing in the second context. Same term "B", different underlying intentions. Language ain't math, and it's never going to be. Language is an art form we all participate in, it's an interactive nuanced performance. We perform human language for one another.
’Twas brillig, and the slithy toves       Did gyre and gimble in the wabe: All mimsy were the borogoves,       And the mome raths outgrabe. “Beware the Jabberwock, my son!       The jaws that bite, the claws that catch! Beware the Jubjub bird, and shun       The frumious Bandersnatch!” – Jabberwocky, by Lewis Carroll
(Is this wrong or right? The question makes no sense, as this is a poem. For this particular style of poetic art (a nonsense poem), the words don't matter, only how the sounds go together.
We have to understand the goal if we're ever able to evaluate if something's wrong or not. Broadly, there are two types of social interactions, math and art.
Math just is, it exists with or without people. People can "do" math, and in doing so they can do a terrible job of it, creating inconsistent statements.
Art has to have an artist and an audience, even if they're the same person. The artist and audience get together to create some mutual experience: learning, joy, drama, persuasion, tool-making. Math just exists regardless of us humans, art is performed.
If I tried really hard and I were a good actor, I could perform mathematical statements. Using a lot of inflection and body movements, I could stand in front of you and take the same algebraic statements about x and y above and perform them for you such that you receive half-a-dozen different meanings from them. Same math, different language meanings. Math is context-free. Art is all about context.
Here we have our highest-order error about wrongness: failure to understand (or appreciate) the difference between human language and formal systems (algebra, geometry, calculus, category theory, computer programs, etc) You can't logically-reason about conceptual ideas, at least not in order to arrive at some kind of proof. (You can and should use logic for a lot of other things, though! You should be constantly using it! This is not an argument for giving up reason or logic!)
Let's take another look at our Ladder Of Civilization from the books, this time presented bottom-to-top in terms of inferences. On the left we have example lifeforms. On the right we have our nodes. In the middle is a presentation of what depends on what.
